Yes, there, we're ready to go now. Today is Friday the 23rd of September. My name is Jill
Willey and I'm at Habit Hardware talking to Mr. John Jones who has lived in this area all his
life. John, thank you very much for agreeing to have a chat with me. First of all, could we just
start with your year of birth, John, please? I was born on the 2nd of February 1948. And can you
tell me where you were born? I was born in a bedroom at Upper Llanfadog. Llanfadog. Can you
tell me exactly where Upper Llanfadog or Llanfadog Ichaf is then, John? Well, as you go from Raida
up the Ellon Valley, you go past the Ellon Valley Hotel and it's the next farm on your
right.
About 300 yards away. Thank you. And what sort of facilities do you remember as you were growing
up? Things like running water and etc. Can you give me some details of that sort of thing?
Well, we had no electricity. The toilet was outside about 50 yards away. And the water we
had from the spout. And my mother did all the washing and that.
And the water was out there by the brook. And bathing was a tin bath brought into the back kitchenolution.
Perhaps twice a week. Sometimes only once a week. And no electricity. So we had these
paraffin lamps that you had to pump up all the time when the pressure dropped. I see. And how did you get to the
farm? How much work did you yourself do around the farm, John, as a young boy growing up?
I did quite a bit. When I attended Ellon Village School, I used to milk a cow every morning
by hand because we saw milk round the Ellon Village, and that was my contribution. I milked
this one cow who was my favourite, perched on a little stool.
and then I walked to the school afterwards.
And you actually got your water from where exactly, John?
Well, between the house and building at Llanfadog, there was a brook coming down
and we had a spout and a little pool there and that is where the water came from.
But when I was about 10, we had it piped about 500 yards from another well out in the field
and that was wonderful spring water and the only time I saw that go dry was in the hot summer of 1976.
Indeed. And were your family born at and grew up in Llanfadog, Upper?
My father was born there.
Oh.
And my mother was born at the convent, Llania.
Now, were you a large family, John, in Llanfadog?
Yes, we were. I was the fourth, but there was a baby loss between me and the sister above me.
So we were five, really. And so there was five of us, but I was born a long time after.
My two older sisters were 22 and 20 when I was born.
And two of my three sisters were married with children, so I have nephews and nieces older than myself.
That's quite unusual, but of course it does happen.
What sort of major events can you remember in the Elland Valley as you were growing up, John?
Well, I suppose the first one was when the Queen came with the Duke of Edinburgh in October 1952.
I would have been four years old. And I just remember standing outside the hotel over on where the bicycle path is now with our flags.
And my sister Joan was a waitress in the Elland Valley and she waited on the Queen.
Oh, what an accolade, my word.
And what places did you have to play in and to generally just explore in your Elland Valley area?
On a farm. You had plenty of places. You had fields all round you.
But I think me and my nephews enjoyed going down the brook to where it meets the River Elland.
And we were catching minnows there until I was old enough to have a rod and line.
And I loved fishing in those days.
Quite a lot of that goes on at the Elland Valley, doesn't it?
Right, now what memories do you have of the big shearings that took place in the Elland Valley, John?
Oh, well, it was the highlight of the year.
Like, you swapped men with neighbouring farms.
So, you know, there might be 30 men would come to your shearing.
And it was the day of the year.
Like, and...
You started off with breakfast and then you had lunch and tea and hopefully you finished about 5 o'clock.
And we had one hill which was up above the Clirwin Dam.
So them sheep had to be driven down on a two-day drive sort of thing to share at Uppal and Vaddog.
And then that night they were taken back up to the Hen Run and they went on from there back to their hill next day.
And shearing was a wonderful thing.
As a boy, the highlight was after dinner we'd have a game of football with all the younger men.
But what I remember, there was four or five old men sat outside the barn on a bench all day.
And all they were sitting down and talking about tails.
And they seemed very old to me.
But when I think back, they were probably...
Only in their late 60s, you know.
But the way they dressed and that, I thought they were 100.
But I'm sure they had lots of interesting memories to share.
Yes.
So would you say that despite the rural locality, you had plenty to do and a very good social life, you knew everyone?
Oh yes, I knew everyone.
And as I'd got two nephews living behind the Elland Valley Hotel,
the three of us sort of played together most nights and played football in the field at Llanfadog.
And later on, when the Birmingham City police cadets came to Elland Village, they had goalposts put up on the green.
So we used to go up there to play football.
And I've seen us cycle down to Llanowthal to play Boys of Llanowthal.
And everywhere we went, we cycled.
And I was a founder member of Raider Young Farmers, and that started in 1963.
And till we were old enough to drive, we went there on a pushbike.
Which was up in Bryn Tyrian then. They held the meetings.
And Bryn Tyrian, I understand, is the then secondary school of the area. Is that correct?
Yes, it was.
The only time I ever attended...
Bryn Tyrian was to try my 11 plus.
Right. We'll come on to that now then, on to school life.
Can you tell me where you went to school and what age you were when you started, John?
I went to Elland Village Primary School at East 1953.
My birthday was February.
So I'd...
I'd been there for a year.
I'd just gone five.
And my sister Joan took me to school the first morning.
And all the other pupils were stood in the entrance, I think, waiting the newcomer.
And I was there till 1959.
And I had many a happy time looking back in the Valley School.
We were never more than 20 pupils.
And I think when I left, they were down to 12.
And there was two teachers there.
The first teacher was Mrs. Jim Price, or Mrs. Betty Price.
And the senior teacher was Miss Chew.
I have heard those names.
Right.
Could I add one more thing?
Please.
The only thing I hated about the Elland Valley School, every June, the Lord Mayor of Birmingham came down.
And we had the June Tea.
And, of course, the tea was nice.
I loved that.
But afterwards, we had to perform on stage.
And every year, they seemed to have me to sing a solo.
And after that, the Lady Mayoress presented us all with a book for what we'd done during the year.
If you'd done well, you had the best books.
Right.
And am I right in thinking that the school at the Elland Valley School,
the Elland Village, was where the lodge is now?
Yes, it was.
There was a school immediately above it when the works were going on.
But this new school was built in 1909.
And my mother went to the old school just above it.
But my father was not allowed to go to that school
because he was living in the Radnish Ascent.
And he had to walk three miles to come to the school every day.
So you yourself went to the Elland Village School,
but you were still in what was then Radnish, weren't you?
So were there many other children from Radnish in that school?
No.
I think at the time I left, there was just two of us.
The other boy didn't try the 11 plus.
So he went straight to the 11 plus.
He went straight to Brynturion.
There was three the same age as me living on the Breckinshire side.
So they went to BILF High School.
And they didn't have to try the 11 plus.
I was the only one out of the five of us that had to try the 11 plus.
And was that because Radnish and Breckinshire,
being different authorities,
had decided different rules regarding the 11 plus?
Yes, it had.
I mean, it's different now.
You can go to any school.
But in them days it was Radnish and Breckinshire.
And I only lived 200 yards from the River Elland.
And if I'd been the other side, I'd have been in Breckinshire.
And would not have had to take the 11 plus, I see.
Now having taken the 11 plus, what school did you then go to, John?
I went to Lander and Dudd Grammar School in the first week of September 1959,
when a school car driven by Mr Harold Ashton
from the shop down opposite Jimmy Lloyd's yard
drove me down to the bus.
And then we met the bus up by the Smithfield in Raider.
And there was a boys' bus and a girls' bus.
And how long were you at that school, travelling to and from then, John?
Well, I left in...
1963, because I'd had a couple of run-ins with Mr Harold's headmaster.
And he said that I had to try my O levels.
And I said, I'll show you.
And I left.
You left. Right.
Well, John, you must have seen quite a lot of changes in the valley.
Would you like to talk a little bit about the development of the valley as you know it?
Well, I've seen lots of changes.
Not for the better, in my opinion.
I, you know, although I'm a proud Welshman,
Birmingham were very good landlords.
And they were good to the farmers.
And they would provide new gates and hurdles and fencing material every year.
And then when it changed over to Welsh Water,
it was a downward spiral.
And I think the valley was much better in those days.
Much tidier.
You could fish from the Cabin Dam to Garrick Dee.
That railway line had two or three sheep in it.
And it kept all the foliage down.
Now it's just like a jungle.
And you can't fish one yard of it.
Very, very unfortunate.
Because fishing is really quite a prominent activity in our area, isn't it?
Yes.
Speaking about the livestock now,
how often did you actually come into Raida to the market or to any other market?
Well, I don't remember coming much.
My father, you know, would bring a cow or cow and calf or something occasionally to the mart.
And we'd always sell our sale ewes in the autumn.
And we drove them down with two dogs.
And I sometimes walked in front and my father behind.
And we never lost one.
We always got them to the market and tied the dogs up there all day and sold.
And one year the prices were poor, so we didn't sell.
I was about 16 at the time.
Anyway, my father was getting on then.
And a car stopped when we were driving down.
And he was driving his sheep home.
And he offered father a lift home.
And he said, I'll leave my dog with you.
And soon as father got in the car, the dog went back towards Raida.
And unfortunately, he got killed by a car.
And I got the sheep home with my dog.
And then my sister Joan went back to Raida in the van to look for this dog
and found him dead on the road and brought him back.
And that's what happened.
And I'm so sad.
How unfortunate.
One that I'm sure...
And we took the sheep to the next fair and didn't do any better.
So we may as well have sold them on the first fair.
All memories, of course, Joan, aren't they?
Yes.
Now, if we could come back to the school.
I believe you had some relatives that actually taught at that school, John.
Can you tell us a little bit about that, please?
Well, they didn't teach at that school.
They taught at the old school up the cabin, which is now under the water.
I think they moved here in 1891.
Elizabeth Ably and her sister Alice Anne Ably, who became my grandmother.
She married Evan Jones from Upperland Paddock.
And they were brought here to teach English because they knew that the dams was coming.
And there was a lot of English and Irish and Scots people moving into the area.
So that was the end of the Welsh language in the Allen Valley School.
The demise of the Welsh language in the valley is something I'd like to touch on now.
Prior to that, your family would have been Welsh speakers, presumably, your ancestors.
Yes.
Do you actually remember any of your family, older relatives, actually speaking Welsh as their day-to-day language?
Well, my father could speak Welsh quite good.
But as he had an English mother, there was English spoke at home, you know.
But his father was fluent Welsh.
And then on my mother's side, the family, they were all fluent Welsh.
But, you know, they had died before I was sort of born.
So, and my grandfather and grandmother from the clean, they were more English than Welsh because they were both, well, one was brought up at the Gunfan and the other was born, brought up at the Dunfan New Bridge on Wye.
I see.
And so, was Welsh not taught at all then in either of those schools, the old one you've mentioned and the current one?
Was Welsh not taught at all?
No.
There was no Welsh in school when I was there.
Well, we did the national anthem and that in Welsh, but no, it was all English.
I see.
And what about your grammar school days then in Llandrindod?
Did you learn Welsh there at all?
Yes.
When I went to Llandrindod, I went to Llandrindod.
I had the choice to either learn Welsh or French and I was taught Welsh with a teacher called Annie Griffiths.
Right.
So, sadly, well, there's a real resurgence now in learning Welsh, of course, but it's, you know, it's a little sad.
Yeah, my two grandchildren now, Arthur and Marnie, are both in the Welsh unit.
That's a very good idea. That's here in Raeder, is it?
Yes, in, yes, up in Rintyria.
Oh, okay.
Which I am very pleased about because I am very Welsh, you know, in my thoughts.
Very commendable, John, I'm sure.
John, could we touch on pony trekking? I understand you had quite an involvement in that in your younger days.
Yes.
I was on pony trekking.
I was on the pony trekking committee for many years.
They were called Raeder Pony Trekking Association.
And Mr. David Evans was the secretary and people like Kinsey Morgan and Gerald Morgan were chairman and vice chairman.
And I was always interested in it, probably because every year a lot of pretty girls came along.
And I met one called Gina Day.
And after on and off romance for four years, I married her.
And she is now still called Gina Jones.
But unfortunately, we got divorced.
But the trekking was a wonderful thing.
And I've seen up to 100 ponies going out on a day, you know.
Terrific line of trekkers.
And they came from all over the, well, all over Europe, actually.
But in the end, I was guide for two years.
And it was a much harder job then because instead of having a trekker for a week who would pick up things, you had day trekkers.
And half of them couldn't ride.
And you couldn't go any faster than the slowest rider or the poorest rider.
And some of you had to lead, you know.
But I always found out that if anybody arrived on a mountain, they were going to be a little bit slower.
And if they had a motorbike, they could ride.
The balance was right.
I've never seen a poor rider off a motorbike.
Using the same muscles.
I wouldn't doubt.
Fine.
Now, John, you've spoken about riding your bike a lot for recreation, etc.
Did you use horses as a means of transport for getting around generally at all?
Oh, yes.
My father was always on horseback.
He used to do all the gathering of sheep on horseback.
And I rode a horse a lot.
Like, I was probably riding a three-year-old.
I think I started off on the donkey in Aberystwyth.
But I've got a photo of me on that.
And we had a hill up above the Clervin Dam called Clwyddyr.
So when we wanted to gather that.
We would ride up to the Henvryn.
And then go over the top of the hill and drop down on Clwyddyr.
Always on horseback.
Drive the sheep back down what we wanted to bring down to the Henvryn.
Have dinner there with my auntie and uncle.
And then drive them down to Llanfadog on horseback.
But mind you, in those days, I'm talking up to 1979.
The roads were much quieter than today.
And you felt quite happy.
Now you can't go 100 yards without a car behind you.
Things have certainly changed, haven't they, in the transport department.
And John, I understand you've worked very hard and long on compiling your family tree.
And am I right in thinking that it takes you right back to the Lewis Lloyds, the original landowners?
Yes.
Well, me and my son Tom have done a lot of work on it.
And I've had help of other people.
But being as they were sort of landed gentry, it was quite easy to trace them.
But Tom has gone back, I think it's 700 years, to the Powells from Lanarkow, who married into the Lewis Lloyds.
And I've got it down to this present day, which I'm very proud of.
And now when the dams are very low, the walls of Nantwilt have all come in sight.
And the gardens, you know.
And that's where I think, you know, that it all started for me in the Ellon Valley.
Well, it's wonderful to see these houses suddenly arising out of the water, isn't it?
It makes you want to do that.
You mentioned the Lanarkow.
That was Nantwilt, I believe, where the Lewis Lloyds lived.
Were they actually in the Ellon Valley or were they in the Clydwyn Valley?
Well, it's actually on the banks of the Clydwyn River, isn't it?
The Nantwilt estate.
But I mean, they owned so much of it, right up to Clydwyn Farm, which, you know, is miles above the Clydwyn Dam.
And one of my ancestors, Peter Jones from Abergwessing, who already was a huge landowner over there and had thousands of sheep,
he married into the Lewis Lloyds and the rest is history, as they say.
And how long have you been working on this family tree then, you and your son?
Oh, you're never finished.
You know, there's something comes up new all the time.
I found a cousin in London the other day, Sanders, her name is, Miss Sanders.
And there's a lot of them out in Perth.
And Patagonia.
And mother's great uncle, David Jones, had a farm out in Buenos Aires.
And the name of the farm was Elvira.
And my mother named my older sister Elvira Mary.
How nice.
Right. You have grandchildren now, John.
Are they enjoying being at the valley and enjoying the places where you grew up?
Yes, because I've still got some ground belonging to Apple and Raddock.
And they love it up there.
Arthur went up the other day to burn a bit of cardboard or something, and he thinks it's wonderful.
And Marnie's up there every night with her father, running a dog around.
And I think it's nice to get out of town.
Well, what better place, indeed, than the beautiful...
The beautiful Ellen Valley.
Well, John, it's been absolutely fascinating talking to you.
We could go on all day, really, thinking about things.
So thank you very, very much for your input, your time, and all your fascinating information.
Thank you very much for you asking me these questions.
You're welcome.